Suggestion for message types. (#56)
pymeasure/leco-protocol: control_protocol.md

For such a RPC message, the first content frame MUST consist in a JSON-RPC compatible content, for example a single request object or a batch of request objects.

### List of methods

List of methods defined by LECO.
You MAY implement the optional methods of this list and you MUST implement the methods obligatory for your type of Component.
All methods implemented in a Component MUST adhere to this list or MUST have a name different to any method in this list.

#### Component

Any Component, i.e. any participant in the LECO protocol, MUST offer the following methods.

> ::: json

Reviewer: Do we really want to put json into the markdown documents? Shouldn't we rather put the json schema file somewhere (for automated use) and either parse (automated) or paraphrase (manual)/present it in text?

Reviewer 2: As we have a standard, which defines, how to define RPC calls, we should use it and not some other method (e.g. python method definitions).

You're right, the JSON text is quite large in comparison to python definitions or human text.

I'm against manual rephrasing (although we might not change it that often), so it should be an automatic process.

What do you think about importing name and description (which we should add), such that the documentation will look like this:

"""
A Component may implement the following methods, for full specification see `link_to_json_file`:

- `shut_down`: Shut down the Component.
- `set_log_level`: Set the Component's logging level.

"""

Reviewer: I see your point regarding not manually duplicating stuff.

The specification document should be complete-ish, asking a reader to manually crawl through a json file elsewhere is quite uncomfortable. Maybe we can link/include specific sections of a json file using Sphinx?
A quick search yielded https://sphinx-jsonschema.readthedocs.io/en/latest/directive.html#an-example which looks like what we want?

Reviewer: nice!

{
    "openrpc": "1.2.6",
    "info": {
        "title": "Component",
        "version": "0.1.0"
    },
    "methods": [
        {
            "name": "pong",
            "description": "Respond to a ping.",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        }
    ],
    "components": {

>         "schemas": {}

Reviewer: what is this for?

Reviewer 2: To hold more information. According to the spec it is not required, so I remove it.

    }
}
:::

Any Component MAY offer ANY of the following methods.

> Components SHOULD offer ``shut_down``.

Reviewer: I'm curious about the optional methods. What happens if some component calls another one's `shutdown`, but that is not implemented? Do we need some common fallback method? Do you get a not implemented error back or somesuch?

Reviewer 2: > Do you get a not implemented error back or somesuch?

jsonrpc has a "method not found" error defined.

> I'm curious about the optional methods.

My reasoning is: There are some methods necessary, such that a Component fulfills it role (as a component, it has to be pingable), these are necessary.

Some features are nice to have, for example logging is not essential (maybe the Component does not have logging capabilities).

Reviewer: Yes, I realise why optional methods can be useful. We should have a clear approach how do deal with that optionality, though -- there are several possibilities (do we error? ignore? publish/supply a list of implemented methods? how should the initiating party deal with that? ...)

Reviewer 2: Components MUST adhere to openRPC, therefore they MUST offer a "rpc.discover" methods, which tells about all the implemented methods (the output is exactly that, what is part of this PR).

- [ ] Should we include this method in the Components list (together with "pong")?

If you try to call a method, a Component does not have, you get an appropriate error.

So, you (as a user) can either query beforehand and use only methods present, or you can try a method name and handle the error.

Reviewer: > Should we include this method in the Components list (together with "pong")?

IMO, yes.

> So, you (as a user) can either query beforehand and use only methods present, or you can try a method name and handle the error.

It's more a LECO _implementor_ that has to deal with that. As we are designing for different implementations to talk to each other, I'm wondering if we should standardise the expectations around what happens with optional methods. The answer might as well be "no", or "use what `rpc.discover` gives you as you see fit".

Reviewer 2: > "no", or "use what rpc.discover gives you as you see fit".

That's my stance 😁

::: json
{
    "openrpc": "1.2.6",
    "info": {
        "title": "Component-optional",
        "version": "0.1.0"
    },
    "methods": [
        {

>             "name": "set_log_level",

Reviewer: is there a way to express optionality (`"required": false`) on a method level in openrpc?

Reviewer: instead of integers, should we have a categorical/set? info/debug/warning/error/critical? That would probably be more universal, and would more easily map across languages (not everybody uses Python `logging` style).

Reviewer 2: > instead of integers, should we have a categorical/set? info/debug/warning/error/critical? That would probably be more universal, and would more easily map across languages (not everybody uses Python logging style).

you mean "set_info", "set_debug", "set_warning"...?

Reviewer 2: > is there a way to express optionality ("required": false) on a method level in openrpc?

No, as it is not useful, that a server states: I might have optionally that method. Either the server has the method (then it is in the schema) or it does not have the method.

We are basically describing the schema a Component should have, so we have other requirements.

Reviewer: > you mean "set_info", "set_debug", "set_warning"...?

No, I mean the parameter of the method
"name": "level",
  "schema": {
  "type": ~~"integer"~~ "one-of-info/debug/warning/error/critical"

            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "level",
                    "schema": {

>                         "type": "integer"

Reviewer: Can the schema prescribe e.g. the range of valid values, too? Otherwise, an integer log level is pretty hard to guess the meaning of, I think.

Reviewer 2: You can prescribe the range, but lets use the other discussion.

                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "shut_down",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },

>                 "required": true

Reviewer: Is this generally the way to express a method without return value?

Reviewer 2: The method returns something, namely a `None` object.

If you do not specify a `result` object, the method will never send any response.
JSONRPC allows to send a message (called notification), which will not get a response, by not setting any `id`.

"The description of the result returned by the method. If defined, it MUST be a Content Descriptor or Reference Object. If undefined, the method MUST only be used as a [notification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification#notification)." (https://spec.open-rpc.org/#content-descriptor-object)

Reviewer: > The method returns something, namely a None object.

Careful, a function returning `None` even when it has no `return` is a Pythonism. A C++ `void` function would return nothing. We should strive to have LECO be implementation-language-independent.

Is returning null used as some kind of confirmation in LECO? Are we using that returned object for anything (Sorry, I have forgotten this detail). If yes, should that be a success indicator or something? If no, should that method maybe be such a notification?

Reviewer 2: Let's make it more hands on:

We have a server (in whatever language written).
If it offers a method which does not have a return value defined in the openrpc schema file, the server must not send a response after the method has been executed.
If the openrpc schema file defines `result: null`, then the software shall send a response with `"result": null` in ASCII code, if requested. Any language should be able to generate that ASCII code, whether the language has a `None` object or not.

So its all about the JSON definitions, not about the underlying language. I'm just applying these specs to our use case.

            }
        },
    ],
    "components": {
        "schemas": {}
    }
}
:::

#### Coordinator

> Control protocol Coordinators are also {ref}`Components <control_protocol.md#Component>` and MUST offer methods accordingly.

Reviewer: > ..and MUST offer methods accordingly.

This is already prescribed above, and should preferably not be duplicated.

                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "sign_out",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "coordinator_sign_in",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "coordinator_sign_out",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "set_nodes",
            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "nodes",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "object",

>                         "additionalProperties": true

Reviewer: Not strings with node names? Isn't it weird to send whole node objects over the wire?
IMO, if possible we should stay text-based in our message interface, no?

Reviewer 2: I called the "rpc.discover" methods on the different devices to get their (openrpc) response. From these responses I extracted the methods.
In this case, I might have not defined the proper parameter type, such that the rpc server did not know it better.

Reviewer: Ah, so this is WIP and can be made more specific (from type hints or so)?

Reviewer 2: I just looked at the python file `leco_protocols`: I defined `dict` without any other declaration. Here we have the consequences.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it "relies heavily" (quote from the package) on type hints.

I reworked all the json files according to open-rpc specs and json-schema.

                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {

>             "name": "set_remote_components",

Reviewer: what is this for? I must have forgotten. :confused:

Reviewer 2: That's to tell about your Components.
Coordinator A calls `set_remote_components(Components_of_Coordinator_A)` of `Coordinator B, such that the Coordinator B knows, which Components are connected to Coordinator A (that's for the directory exchange). I'm open for a better name.

Reviewer: Ah ok. Maybe `list_connected_components(Components_of_Coordinator_A)`?

Reviewer 2: See general discussion regarding method names.

                {
                    "name": "components",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "array",
                        "items": {
                            "type": "string"
                        }
                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "compose_global_directory",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "object",
                    "additionalProperties": true
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "compose_local_directory",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "object",
                    "additionalProperties": true
                },
                "required": true
            },

>             "description": "Compose a dictionary with the local directory."

Reviewer: What are you trying to say with "Compose" here?

Reviewer 2: "Create": It composes the full dictionary from the different sources.

Reviewer: Maybe "Return the local directory as a dictionary" and name `return_local_directory`?
If we encode the return type in the schema, we might leave that part out of the docstring (a dict is not called a "dictionary" in all languages).

Reviewer 2: We have to see what to do with dictionaries, as json schema does not seem to support them (or I do not see it).

Reviewer 2: I renamed the methods (see general discussion), such that this conversation can be resolved, I think.

Reviewer: thanks!

        },
        {
            "name": "get_component_names",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "array",
                    "items": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {

>             "name": "clean_addresses",

Reviewer: "clean" could also be understood "delete all" IMO. Maybe `prune_addresses`, thinking of `git fetch --prune`, or something similar -- `remove_expired_addresses`?

Reviewer 2: Done.

            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "expiration_time",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "number"
                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            },

>             "description": "Clean all expired addresses from the directory.\n\n        :param float expiration_time: Expiration limit in s.\n        "

Reviewer: Can we express the unit of the parameter in the schema?

Reviewer 2: I just had a look at the [specification ](https://spec.open-rpc.org/#content-descriptor-object)(I'm not an openrcp expert yet):

Yes, for example (summary and description are two available fields for every parameter/result):
~~~json
{
            "name": "get_polling_interval",
            "params": [],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "number"
                },
                "summary": "in ms",
                "description": "whatever",
                "required": true
            }
        },
~~~

Reviewer: This seems like a workaround (`summary` seems be intended like the first line of a docstring, `description` everything), but would be possible. 
Maybe just keep including the unit in the description, probably easiest for now?

        },
    ],
    "components": {
        "schemas": {}
    }
}
:::

#### Actor

An Actor is a {ref}`control_protocol.md#Component`.
Additionally, it MUST offer the following methods.

::: json
{
    "openrpc": "1.2.6",
    "info": {
        "title": "Actor",
        "version": "0.1.0"
    },
    "methods": [
        {

>             "name": "get_parameters",

Reviewer: do we have singular variants, too, or do we want to use one method for both?

Reviewer 2: I just defined the multiple variant to keep it simple.

Reviewer 2: We can later add the single variant, if you want to.

            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "parameters",
                    "schema": {
                        "anyOf": [
                            {

>                                 "type": "array",

Reviewer: duplicated? something's wrong here I think.

Reviewer 2: In python I defined `parameters: tuple[str] | list[str]` as it does not matter. Both, tuple and list, translate to array....

I fix it.

                                "items": {
                                    "type": "string"
                                }
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "array",
                                "items": {
                                    "type": "string"
                                }
                            }
                        ]
                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "object",
                    "additionalProperties": true

>                 },

Reviewer: wouldn't that be one or more key-value mappings?

Reviewer 2: Reworked.

                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "set_parameters",
            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "parameters",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "object",
                        "additionalProperties": true
                    },

>                     "required": true

Reviewer: In my understanding of #29, we would have `set_parameter`, that takes a parameter name and a value. This does not reflect that AFAICT.
How we deal with setting multiple at once I think we have not discussed yet -- maybe implement/schematize the single versions, first?

Reviewer 2: That object should be a dictionary with key value pairs.

                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "call_action",
            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "action",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "required": true
                },
                {

>                     "name": "_args",

Reviewer: why not `"args"`?

                    "schema": {
                        "anyOf": [
                            {
                                "type": "array"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "array"

>                             },

Reviewer: why this duplication?

                            {
                                "type": "null"
                            }
                        ]
                    },
                    "required": false
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {},
                "required": true
            }
        },
    ],
    "components": {
        "schemas": {}
    }
}
:::

#### Polling Actor

An {ref}`control_protocol.md#Actor`, which supports regular polling of values, MUST implement these methods, additionally to those of an Actor.

::: json
{
    "openrpc": "1.2.6",
    "info": {
        "title": "Polling Actor",
        "version": "0.1.0"
    },
    "methods": [
        {
            "name": "start_polling",
            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "polling_interval",
                    "schema": {
                        "anyOf": [
                            {
                                "type": "number"
                            },
                            {
                                "type": "null"

>                             }

Reviewer: What is the difference between supplying polling_interval=null and leaving out the argument entirely (required=false)?

Reviewer 2: I think this is a consequence of the automatic generation by the python package based on the type hint `None | int`.

Reviewer 2: I reworked them all manually.

                    "type": "number"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
        {
            "name": "set_polling_interval",
            "params": [
                {
                    "name": "polling_interval",
                    "schema": {
                        "type": "number"
                    },
                    "required": true
                }
            ],
            "result": {
                "name": "result",
                "schema": {
                    "type": "null"
                },
                "required": true
            }
        },
    ],
    "components": {
        "schemas": {}
    }
}
:::

#### Locking Actor

An {ref}`control_protocol.md#Actor` which support locking resources MUST offer the following methods.

:::{note}
TBD change the python code to json
:::

::: python
    def lock(self, resource: Optional[str] = None) -> bool: ...

    def unlock(self, resource: Optional[str] = None) -> None: ...

    def force_unlock(self, resource: Optional[str] = None) -> None: ...
:::

### Errors

Every error has a code and a message.
Additionally they may have a ``data`` field with more information.

> According to JSONRPC, applications can define error codes between -32000 and -32099.

Reviewer: 100 error codes is not terrribly much :-/

Reviewer 2: Especially, as there are only a handful of [error codes](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification#error_object) defined:

<html><body>
<!--StartFragment-->

code | message | meaning
-- | -- | --
-32700 | Parse error | Invalid JSON was received by the server.An error occurred on the server while parsing the JSON text.
-32600 | Invalid Request | The JSON sent is not a valid Request object.
-32601 | Method not found | The method does not exist / is not available.
-32602 | Invalid params | Invalid method parameter(s).
-32603 | Internal error | Internal JSON-RPC error.
-32000 to -32099 | Server error | Reserved for implementation-defined server-errors.

<!--EndFragment-->
</body>
</html>

LECO defines the following errors.

#### Routing errors

Errors related to routing (mainly emitted by Coordinators).
Their error codes are in the range of -32090 to -32099.

| code   | message                            | data                 | description                                                                          |
|--------|------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | -32090 | You did not sign in!               | -                    | If a Component did not sign in.                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| -32090 | Component not signed in yet!       | Name of the component| If a Component did not sign in.                                                      |
```
?

Reviewer 2: A Coordinator sends that error to a Component, if the Component is not signed in, such that the message makes sense from the Component's point of view.
And a Component does not need to be informed about its own name.

That was the reasoning behind this error message.

Reviewer: Consider though that error messages can end up without that context, e.g. in an error log or bug report, so a little added context can be quite useful I think.

Reviewer 2: We have the message header with the receiver name, however, that might get lost.

Ok, I'll change it.

> | -32091 | The name is already taken.         | -                    | A Component tries to sign in, but another Component is signed in with the same name  |

Reviewer: Include Name in question?

> | -32092 | Node is not known.                 | Name of the node     | The node to which the message should be sent, is not known to this Coordinator.      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| -32092 | Node is unknown.                   | Name of the node     | The node to which the message should be sent, is not known to this Coordinator.      |
```
